A short history The algorithms that we examine have an interesting history; we summarize it here to help place the various methods io perspective. 

There is a simple brute-force algorithm for substring search that is in widespread use. While it has a worst-case running time proportional to MN, the strings that arise in many applications lead to a running time that is (except in pathological cases) proportional to M  N. Furthermore, it is well-suited to standard architectural features on most computer systems, so an optimized version provides a standard benchmark that is difficult to beat, even with a clever algorithm. 

In 1970, S. Cook proved a theoretical result about a particular type of abstract machine that implied the existence of an algorithm that solves the substring search problem in time proportional to M  N in the worst case. D. E. Knuth and V. R. Pratt laboriously followed through the construction Cook used to prove his theorem (which was not intended to be practical) and refined it into a relatively simple and practical algorithm. This seemed a rare and satisfying example of a theoretical result with immediate (and unexpected) practical applicability. But it turned out that J. H. Morris had discovered virtually the same algorithm as a solution to an annoying problem confronting him when implementing a text editor (he wanted to avoid having to “back up’’ in the text string). The fact that the same algorithm arose from two such different approaches lends it credibility as a fundamental solution to the problem. 

Knuth, Morris, and Pratt didn’t get around to publishing their algorithm until 1976, and in the meantime R. S. Boyer and J. S. Moore (and, independently, R. W. Gosper) discovered an algorithm that is much faster in many applications, since it often examines only a fraction of the characters in the text string. Many text editors use this algorithm to achieve a noticeable decrease in response time for substring search. 

Both the Knuth-Morris-Pratt (KMP) and the Boyer-Moore algorithms require some complicated preprocessing on the pattern that is difficult to understand and has limited the extent to which they are used. (In fact, the story goes that an unknown systems programmer found Morris’s algorithm too difficult to understand and replaced it with a brute-force implementation.) 

In 1980, M. O. Rabin and R. M. Karp used hashing to develop an algorithm almost as simple as the brute-force algorithm that runs in time proportional to M  N with very high probability. Furthermore, their algorithm extends to two-dimensional patterns and text, which makes it more useful than the others for image processing. 

This story illustrates that the search for a better algorithm is still very often justified; indeed, one suspects that there are still more developments on the horizon even for this classic problem.